NEP-509: Stateless validation stage 0 (#509)
near/NEPs: neps/nep-0509.md

* No validator needs to track all shards.
* Security of protocol must not degrade.
  * Validator assignment for both chunk validation and block validation should not create any security vulnerabilities.
* Block processing time should not take significantly more than what it takes today.
* Any additional load on network and compute should not negatively affect existing functionalities of any node in the blockchain.
  * The cost of additional network and compute should be acceptable.
* Validator rewards should not be reduced.
* Resharding should still be possible after stateless validation is in place.
* TBD

### Out of scope

* Data size optimizations such as compression, for both chunk data and state witnesses, except basic optimizations that are practically necessary.
* Separation of consensus and execution, where consensus runs independently from execution, and validators asynchronously perform state transitions after the transactions are proposed on the consensus layer, for the purpose of amortizing the computation and network transfer time.
* More shards - this is covered in the resharding project.
* ZK integration.
* Underlying data structure change (e.g. verkle tree).

> * Change to validator rewards.

Author: may need to change this since we are incorporating new reward structure for chunk validator. cc. @Longarithm

* When a chunk producer produces a chunk, in addition to collecting transactions and receipts for the chunk, it will also produce a `ChunkStateWitness`.
  * The `ChunkStateWitness` contains whatever data necessary to prove that this chunk's header should indeed be what is being produced:
    * As it is today, all fields of the `ShardChunkHeaderInnerV2`, except `tx_root`, are uniquely determined by the blockchain's history based on where the chunk is located (i.e. its parent block and shard ID).
    * The `tx_root` is based on the list of transactions proposed, which is at the discretion of the chunk producer. However, these transactions must be valid (i.e. the sender accounts have enough balance and the correct nonce, etc.).
    * This `ChunkStateWitness` proves to anyone, including those who track only block data and no shards, that this chunk header is correct, meaning that the uniquely determined fields are exactly what should be expected, and the discretionary `tx_root` field corresponds to a valid set of transactions.
  * The `ChunkStateWitness` is not part of the chunk itself; it is distributed separately and is considered transient data.

> * The chunk producer then distributes the `ChunkStateWitness` to a subset of *Chunk Validators* assigned for this shard. This is in addition to, and independent of, the existing chunk distribution logic (implemented by `ShardsManager`) today.

Author: Should we talk about chunk witness compression, size limit, and reed-solomon encoding?

cc. @shreyan-gupta, @jancionear , @pugachAG

Author: please check below comment as well

Reviewer: @walnut-the-cat I wrote some documentation on the size limits, could be added to the NEP: https://github.com/near/nearcore/pull/11559

Each chunk validator's stake is divided into "mandates". There are full and partial mandates. The amount of stake for a full mandate is a fixed parameter determined by the stake distribution of all validators, and any remaining amount smaller than a full mandate is a partial mandate. A chunk validator therefore has zero or more full mandates plus up to one partial mandate. The list of full mandates and the list of partial mandates are then separately shuffled and partitioned equally (as in, no more than one mandate in difference between any two shards) across the shards. Any mandate assigned to a shard means that the chunk validator who owns the mandate is assigned to validate that shard. Because a chunk validator may have multiple mandates, it may be assigned multiple shards to validate.

We have done research to show that the security of this algorithm is sufficient with a reasonable number of chunk validators and a reasonable number of shards, assuming a reasonable bound for the total stake of malicious nodes. TODO: Include or link to that research here.

> 

Author: I think it's worth having a separate section for followings:
* state witness compression + size limit
* state witness breakdown with reed solomon encoding
* network optimization needed for each node
* reward calculation change

cc. @pugachAG , @Longarithm , @saketh-are , @shreyan-gupta , @jancionear

## Reference Implementation

> TODO: This is essentially going to be describing the exact structure of `ChunkStateWitness`, `ChunkEndorsement`, and describing the exact algorithm to be used for the chunk validator shuffling.

Author: this needs to be done

Reviewer 2: assigned to @Longarithm in [zulip](https://near.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/407237-core.2Fstateless-validation/topic/NEP/near/444246066)

[This technical section is required for Protocol proposals but optional for other categories. A draft implementation should demonstrate a minimal implementation that assists in understanding or implementing this proposal. Explain the design in sufficient detail that:

* Its interaction with other features is clear.
* Where possible, include a Minimum Viable Interface subsection expressing the required behavior and types in a target programming language. (ie. traits and structs for rust, interfaces and classes for javascript, function signatures and structs for c, etc.)
* It is reasonably clear how the feature would be implemented.
* Corner cases are dissected by example.
* For protocol changes: A link to a draft PR on nearcore that shows how it can be integrated in the current code. It should at least solve the key technical challenges.

The section should return to the examples given in the previous section, and explain more fully how the detailed proposal makes those examples work.]

> ## Validator Role Change

Author: cc. @Longarithm

* Chunk production does not have to be performed by all validators. 

Hence, the most simple proposal is to change Chunk-only producers to Chunk-only validators as follows:
| | Top ~50% validators | Remaining validatiors (Chunk-only validators) |
|-----|:-----:|:----:|
| block production | Y | N |
| chunk production | Y | N |
| block validation | Y | N |
| chunk validation | Y | Y |

Block production and validation remain as responsibility of validators with more stake to maintain the same level of security.

This approach is the most straight forward as it maintains the same grouping as we have today.

Potential improvement to which can lower hardware requirement for more validators is limiting the responsibility of chunk production to top N validators, who are often equipped with powerful machines already.
|  | Top N validatiors (Chunk proposers) | Top ~50% - N validators | Remaining validators (Chunk-only validators) |
|-----|:-----:|:----:|:----:|
| block production | Y | Y | N |
| chunk production | Y | N | N |
| block validation | Y | Y | N |
| chunk validation | Y | Y | N |

> ## Security Implications

Author: cc. @jancionear @pugachAG

Reviewer 2: added in dd9ba0901d72473d17b0897170f4789bf8d4ffae

### Validating the limits

Chunk validators have to verify that chunk producer respected all of the limits while producing the chunk. This means that validators also have to keep track of recorded storage proof by recording all trie accesses and they have to enforce the limits.
If it turns out that some limits weren't respected, the validators will generate a different result of chunk application and they won't endorse the chunk.

### Missing chunks

When a shard is missing some chunks, the following chunk on that shard will receive receipts from multiple blocks. This could lead to large `source_receipt_proofs` so a mechanism is added to reduce the impact. If there are two or more missing chunks in a row,
the shard is considered fully congested and no new receipts will be sent to it (unless it's the `allowed_shard` to avoid deadlocks).

## Validator Role Change
Currently, there are two different types of validators and their responsibilities are as follows:
|  | Top ~50% validators | Remaining validatiors (Chunk only producers) |
|-----|:-----:|:----:|
| block production | Y | N |
| chunk production | Y | Y |
| block validation | Y | N |

### Partial state witness distribution

> TODO

Reviewer 3: Missing section?

Reviewer 4: On it

* Merkle Patricia Trie continues to be the state trie implementation
* Congestion Control is enabled - [NEP-539](https://github.com/near/NEPs/pull/539)

### Design requirements

* No validator needs to track all shards.
* Security of protocol must not degrade.
  * Validator assignment for both chunk validation and block validation should not create any security vulnerabilities.
* Block processing time should not take significantly more than what it takes today.
* Any additional load on network and compute should not negatively affect existing functionalities of any node in the blockchain.
  * The cost of additional network and compute should be acceptable.
* Validator rewards should not be reduced.

### Current design

The current high-level chunk production flow, excluding details and edge cases, is as follows:

* Block producer at height `H` `BP(H)` produces block `B(H)` with chunks accessible to it and distributes it.
* Chunk producer for shard `S` at height `H+1` `CP(S, H+1)` produces chunk `C(S, H+1)` based on `B(H)` and distributes it.
* `BP(H+1)` collects all chunks at height `H+1` until certain timeout is reached.

> * `BP(H+1)` produces block `B(H+1)` with chunks `C(*, H+1)` accessible to it and distributes it, etc.

Reviewer 5: I wanted to emphasize that flow repeats for bigger heights. Made it more clear

  * The 2/3 fraction has the denominator being the total stake assigned to validate this shard, *not* the total stake of all validators.
* The block producer, when producing the block, additionally includes the chunk endorsements (at least 2/3 needed for each chunk) in the block's body. The validity of the block is expanded to also having valid 2/3 chunk endorsements by stake for each chunk included in the block.
  * If a block fails validation because of not having the required chunk endorsements, it is considered a block validation failure for the purpose of Doomslug consensus, just like any other block validation failure. In other words, nodes will not apply the block on top of their blockchain, and (block) validators will not endorse the block.

So the high-level specification can be described as the list of changes in the validator roles and responsibilities:

* Block producers:
  * (Same as today) Produce blocks, (new) including waiting for chunk endorsements
  * (Same as today) Maintain chunk parts (i.e. participates in data availability based on Reed-Solomon erasure encoding)
  * (New) No longer require tracking any shard

>   * (Same as today) Should have high barrier of entry for security reasons, to make block double signing harder.

Reviewer 5: yep

  
When epoch is finalized, all block headers in it uniquely determine who was expected to produce each block and chunk.
Thus, if we define quality ratio for block producer as `produced_blocks/expected_blocks`, everyone is able to compute it.
Similarly, `produced_chunks/expected_chunks` is a quality for chunk producer. 
It is more accurate to say `included_chunks/expected_chunks`, because inclusion of chunk in block is a final decision of a block producer which defines success here.

Ideally, we could compute quality for chunk validator as `produced_endorsements/expected_endorsements`. Unfortunately, we won't do it in Stage 0 because:

* Mask of endorsements is not part of the block header, and it would be a significant change;
* Block producer doesn't have to wait for all endorsements to be collected, so it could be unfair to say that endorsement was not produced if block producer just went ahead.

So for now we decided to compute quality for chunk validator as ratio of `included_chunks/expected_chunks`, where we iterate over chunks which node was expected to validate.

> The obvious drawback here is that if chunks are not produced at all, chunk validators will also be impacted. We plan to address it in the future releases.

Reviewer 6: A more important drawback of this approach is that chunk validators are not incentivized to validate the chunks, given they will be rewarded the same in either case.

Reviewer 5: added

Currently, we have a threshold for each role, and if for some role the same `{role}_quality_ratio` is lower than threshold, the node is kicked out.

If we write this in pseudocode,

```python
if validator is block producer and block_producer_quality_ratio < 0.8:
    kick out validator
if validator is chunk producer and chunk_producer_quality_ratio < 0.8:
    kick out validator
```

For chunk validator, we apply absolutely the same formula. However, because:

* the formula doesn't count endorsements explicitly 
* for chunk producers it kind of just makes chunk production condition stronger without adding value

we apply it to nodes which **only validate chunks**. So, we add this line:

```python
if validator is only chunk validator and chunk_validator_quality_ratio < 0.8:
    kick out validator
```

As we pointed out above, current formula `chunk_validator_quality_ratio` is problematic.
Here it brings even a bigger issue: if chunk producers don't produce chunks, chunk validators will be kicked out as well, which impacts network stability.

> This is another reason to come up with the better formula.  

Reviewer 6: Chunk validators can collude and not endorse some chunks in a way that some chunk producers or other chunk validators get kicked out by not getting their chunks included.

Reviewer 5: But this is more relevant to the chunk endorsement process, not chunk validator kickouts/rewards.

And the base assumption of new approach is to make event "1/3 validators of chunk collude" mean that "1/3 of all validators collude" with high probability, so in this case the base blockchain security assumption fails, on which we rely on.

* `outgoing_receipts_usual_size_limit - 100 KiB`
  * Limit on the size of outgoing receipts to another shard. Needed to keep the size of `source_receipt_proofs` small.
  * On most block heights a shard isn't allowed to send receipts larger than 100 KiB to another shard.
* `outgoing_receipts_big_size_limit - 4.5 MiB`
  * On every block height there's one special "allowed shard" which is allowed to send larger receipts, up to 4.5 MiB in total.
  * A receiving shard will receive receipts from `num_shards - 1` shards using the usual limit and one shard using the big limit.
  * The "allowed shard" is the same shard as in cross-shard congestion control. It's chosen in a round-robin fashion, at height 1 the special shard is 0, at height 2 it's 1 and so on.

In total that gives 4 MiB + 500 KiB + 7MB + 5*100 KiB + 4.5 MiB ~= 16 MiB of maximum witness size. Possibly a little more on missing chunks.

### New limits breaking contracts

> The new limits will break some existing contracts (for example all transctions larger than 1.5 MiB). This is sad, but it's necessary. Stateless validation uses much more network bandwitch than the previous approach, as it has to send over all state on each chunk application. Because network bandwitch is limited, stateless validation

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
The new limits will break some existing contracts (for example, all transactions larger than 1.5 MiB). This is sad, but it's necessary. Stateless validation uses much more network bandwidth than the previous approach, as it has to send over all states on each chunk application. Because network bandwidth is limited, stateless validation
```
